.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii bam-rmdup.1
.\"
.TH BAM-RMDUP 1 "DECEMBER 2012" Applications "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
bam-rmdup \- remove PCR duplicates from BAM files
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bam-rmdup [
.I option
.B |
.I file
.B ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bam-rmdup
searches for PCR duplicates in BAM files.  From each set of duplicates,
a consensus is formed, which replaces the whole set.  Input files must
be sorted by coordinate, all inputs will be merged into a single sorted
output file.

For details, see http://biofs04/trac/bioinf/wiki/DuplicateRemoval.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-o, --output file"
Send output to
.I file
instead of standard output.

.IP "-p, --improper-pairs"
Retain improper pairs, that is, mate-pairs of which only one mate is
mapped.  These are discarded by default.

.IP "-1, --single-read"
Treat all reads as single.  This might be a workaround for a very bad
second read, but is generally considered a bad idea.

.IP "-Q, --max-qual qual"
Set the maximum quality score after consensus calling to
.I qual.
Consensus calling can result in unrealistically high quality scores due
to effect outside this program's scope (presumably errors in PCR).
Quality score are therefore limited to an upper value, even if we didn't
actually remove any duplicates.  The default is 60, corresponding to a
very high fidelity polymerase.

.IP "-s, --no-strand"
Treat the strand information as uninformative.  Normally, PCR duplicates
should always map to the same strand, however, in certain types of
library (e.g. Illumina fork adapter preparation) the two strands of the
same original molecule map to different strands.  With the
.I --no-strand
option, these are considered duplicates, without it, they are distinct.


.SH BUGS
It's way too slow.

.SH AUTHOR
Udo Stenzel <udo_stenzel@eva.mpg.de>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR biohazard (7)

