.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii bam-rmdup.1
.\"
.TH BCL2BAM 1 "OCTOBER 2016" Applications "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
bcl2bam \- convert bcl files to bam
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B bcl2bam [
.I option
.B ... ] [
.I run-folder
.B ... ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B bcl2bam
takes a file system hierarchy of bcl files together with a folder of
location files and converts them to bam.  Paired end and singly or
doubly indexed reads are supported.

If run folders are specified, all lanes in all these folders are
converted.  Information how to split cycles into reads or index reads is
obtained from the
.I RunInfo.xml
file for each, the folders for bcl and locs files are assumed to be in
their customary location.  These settings can be overridden from the command line,
and processing can be restricted to a subset of lanes and/or tiles.

If no run folder is given, the paths to bcl files and locs files must be
specified together with exactly one lane number.  Only the cycles for
the first read can be inferred, the others will have to be specified.
This mode is most useful if the layout of a run folder is
non-standard.

.SH OPTIONS

.IP "-o, --output file"
Send output to
.I file
instead of standard output.  Absent
.IR -o ,
uncompressed BAM is piped to stdout.

.IP "-l, --lanes list"
Restrict processing to the lanes mentioned in 
.IR list .
The default is to process all lanes if run folders are specified.  If no
run-folder is specified, 
.I list
must contain exactly one lane number, which defaults to 
.IR 1 .

.IP "-t, --tiles list"
Restrict processing to tiles in 
.IR list .
The default is to process all tiles for which a 
.I locs
file can be found.

.IP "-e, --experiment-name name"
Override the experiment name to
.IR name , 
which will appear in the qnames of the generated
.I bam 
file.  The experiment name is normally inferred from the base name of
the run-folder, it is empty if no run-folder is specified.

.IP "-b, --bcl-path path"
Set the path to
.I bcl
files to
.IR path .
This folder must contain subfolders for each cycle and one 
.I filter
file for each tile.  Normally it has a fixed position relative to the
run-folder.

.IP "-p, --pos-path path, --locs-path path"
Set the path to
.I locs
files to
.IR path .
This folder must contain one 
.IR locs " or " clocs
file for each tile.  Normally it has a fixed position relative to the
run-folder.

.IP "-r, --read1 range"
Specifies that read one (the read in a single-ending setting or the
first mate in a paired-end setting) encompasses
.IR range .
By default, if a run-folder is given, it is inferred from the
.I RunInfo.xml
file.  Without a run-folder, it is inferred to encompass all cycles or
all cycles from the first to the beginning of any other read.

.IP "-R, --read2 range"
Specifies that read two (the second mate in a paired-end setting)
encompasses
.IR range .
By default, if a run-folder is given, it is inferred from the
.I RunInfo.xml
file.  Without a run-folder, read two is inferred to be absent.

.IP "-i, --index1 range"
Specifies that index read one encompasses
.IR range .
By default, if a run-folder is given, it is inferred from the
.I RunInfo.xml
file.  Without a run-folder, index one is inferred to be absent.

.IP "-I, --index2 range"
Specifies that index read two encompasses
.IR range .
By default, if a run-folder is given, it is usually inferred from the
.I RunInfo.xml
file.  Old 
.I RunInfo.xml
files may be missing this information, so it is possible that it has to
be overridden manually.  Without a run-folder, index two is inferred to
be absent.

.IP "-v, --verbose"
Causes
.I bcl2bam
to print a progress report to stderr.

.IP "-V, --version"
Prints the program's version number and exits.

.IP "-h, -?, --help, --usage"
Prints brief usage information and exits.


.SH NOTES

.SS Command Line Parsing

Where the command line takes a list as an argument, the elements shall
be separated by a comma.  If an element looks like a pair of numbers
separated by a dash, it is interpreted as a range and expanded.

Where the command line takes a range as an argument, the range shall be
specified as two numbers separated by a comma or a dash.  A single
number is also allowed, and specifies the range containing only that
number.


.SS Input Files

All supported input files 
.RI ( locs ", " clocs ", " filter ", " bcl )
can optionally be compressed using either
.IR gzip " or " bgzip .
Decompression is completely transparent.


.SS Output Files

Output is BAM.  Most information is encoded in the standard fields and
flags.  In addition, the first index sequence is placed into the 
.I XI
field with string type, its quality score into the 
.I YI
field with string type, encoded just like in FastQ files.
Likewise, the second index goes into
.IR XJ " and " YJ .


.SH AUTHOR
Udo Stenzel <udo_stenzel@eva.mpg.de>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR biohazard (7)

