.\" Process this file with
.\" groff -man -Tascii bam-rmdup.1
.\"
.TH JIVEBUNNY 1 "JULY 2015" Applications "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
jivebunny \- demultiplex Illumina sequences
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B jivebunny [
.I option
.B |
.I file
.B ... ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B jivebunny
demultiplexes double-index Illumina sequencing data from one or more BAM
files.  In a first pass, the present mixture is analyzed, which serves
to estimate possibly uneven mixture ratios and to assess unexpected
contaminants.  In a second pass, each read is assigned to the most
probable read group given the estimated mixture ratios.  For both
passes, all input files are concatenated.  Summary statistics and
quality scores are computed globally and per read as appropriate.

.SH OPTIONS
.IP "-o, --output file"
Send BAM output to
.IR file .
The default is to produce no output and estimate mixture ratios only.  If 
.I file
is '-', BAM output is sent to
.I stdout
and the final tally is instead sent
to
.IR stderr .

.IP "-I, --index-database file"
Read the database of possible indices from
.IR file .
Every combination of a P7 index and a P5 index from this file is
considered a possible component of the mix.  The default is a file
containing all Illumina Truseq indices and indices from the
Meyer/Kircher paper.  See below for the format of this file.

.IP "-r, --read-groups file"
Read read group definitions from file, see below for the format of this
file.  Read group definitions are not necessary to identify a mixture
component, but only known components can be named and assigned.

.IP "--threshold frac"
Set the threshold for the estimation of mixture components to 
.IR frac .
The iteration stops as soon as no estimate for any component changes by
more than
.IR frac .
The default of 1/200000 seems to work well in practice.

.IP "--sample num"
Sample
.I num
reads for the mixture estimation.  The default is 50000, which is
usually good enough.  By sampling more, the ability to detect
contaminants at low concentration can be improved at the cost of longer
computation.

.IP "--components num"
Print the top
.I num
components of the mixture after estimation.  By default, 25% more than
the number of defined read groups, but at least 20 are printed.  Setting
this to a higher number may be a good idea if you're trying to reverse
engineer a pipetting accident.

.IP "--pedantic"
Be pedantic about read groups.  Normally, 
.I jivebunny
will assign reads to undeclared read groups by placing the names of the
two most likely indices into the 
.I RG
field.  However, since it is not feasible to provide a header that
declares all these potential read groups, the BAM file will technically
be invalid.  
.I samtools
will still happily filter on this field, though.  If the
.I --pedantic
switch is set, these reads are not assigned to any read group.


.IP "--verbose"
Print progress reports during computation.  The estimation process can
be observed and a counter runs while reading or writing BAM files.

.IP "--quiet"
Don't print anything, not even the summary statistics.

.IP "-h, -?, --help, --usage"
Prints a short usage message and exits the program.

.IP "-V, --version"
Prints the version of biohazard used and exits the program.

.SH FILES

.SS Input Files

All input files must be double index BAM files.  Indices are stored in
tagged fields where
.IR XI " and " XJ
contain the first and second ASCII codes index sequence (only A,C,G,T
and N are allowed) and 
.IR YI " and " YJ
contain the quality scores encoded as a string just like in FastaQ
(ASCII codepoint of value plus 33).  Single indexed BAM files should
work in principle, but the output may be hard to interpret.

.SS Output File

The ouput is a single BAM file which is equivalent to the concatenated
inputs with the following modifications:  The header contains an
additional 
.I @PG
line and one
.I @RG
line for each read group.  Each read gains the appropriate 
.I @RG
field if a known read group can be assigned; otherwise the 
.I @RG 
field is deleted.  The fields 
.IR @Z0 " and " @Z2
are deleted and the field
.I @Z1
is added with a Phred scaled quality score for the assigned read group.
(In other words, 
.I @Z1 
is the probability that some other assignment is actually correct,
expressed in deciban.  If no read group could be assigned, this value
may not be of much value.)

.SS Read Group File

The read group file is TAB separated table containg an optional header
line starting with a hash mark ('#') and then one line per read group.
The first field is the name of the read group, the second field is the
name (not the sequence) of the first index, the third is the name of the
second index.  Further fields must have the form
.I XY:val
and are copied into the
.I @RG
header of the output.  This facility can be used to assign libraries or
samples to read groups for easier downstream processing.

.SS Index Database

The index database is a JSON file containing a single object with two
fields named ``p7index'' and ``p5index''.  Each of these is an object
mapping index names to index sequences, the latter encoded as a string.

It is permissible for multiple indices to have the same sequence.  These
will be treated as aliases when parsing read group files, only the first
name is used when producing output.


.SH AUTHOR
Udo Stenzel <udo_stenzel@eva.mpg.de>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
.BR biohazard (7), bam (5), fastq (5), json (5)

Kircher 
.I et.al 
(2012). Double indexing overcomes inaccuracies in multiplex sequencing on the Illumina platform. 
.IR "Nucleic Acids Research, 40" (1), 
e3. doi:10.1093/nar/gkr771
